Blocking Topic Guides (#1389)
moj-analytical-services/splink: docs/topic_guides/blocking/blocking_rules.md

![](../../img/blocking/pairwise_comparisons.png)

For example, a dataset of 1 million input records would generate around 500 billion pairwise record comparisons.

So, when datasets get bigger the amount of computational resource gets extremely large (and costly). In reality, we try and reduce the amount of computation required using **blocking**.

## Blocking

Blocking is a technique for reducing the number of record pairs that are considered by a model.

Considering a dataset of 1 million records, comparing each record against all of the other records in the dataset generates ~500 billion pairwise comparisons. However, we know the vast majority of these record comparisons won't be matches, so processing the full ~500 billion comparisons would be largely pointless (as well as costly and time-consuming).

Instead, we can define a subset of potential comparisons using **Blocking Rules**. These are rules that define "blocks" of comparisons that should be considered. For example, the blocking rule:

`"l.first_name = r.first_name and l.surname = r.surname"` 
 

> will generate pairwise record comparisons amongst pairwise comparisons where first name and surname match.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will generate only those pairwise record comparisons where first name and surname match.
```

> Within a Splink model, you can specify multiple "blocks" through multiple Blocking Rules to ensure all potential matches are considered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within a Splink model, you can specify multiple Blocking Rules to ensure all potential matches are considered.  These are provided as a list.  Splink will then produce all record comparisons that satisfy at least one of your blocking rules.
```

???+ "Further Reading"

    For more information on blocking, please refer to [this article](https://toolkit.data.gov.au/data-integration/data-integration-projects/probabilistic-linking.html#key-steps-in-probabilistic-linking)

### Choosing Blocking Rules

> The blocking process is a compromise between the amount of **compuational resource** used when comparing records and **capturing all true matches**. 

Reviewer: Might be worth saying something like:

"The aim of blocking rules is to have high recall.  Between them, your blocking rules should aim to recover all matching record pairs.

Precision is less important:  record comparisons that 'pass' the blocking rules are then put forward to the scoring/prediction step.  So it doesn't matter if the blocking rules select some (or even many) record pairs which are not matches.

Author: I have reworded this a bit and added

 
Guidance for choosing Blocking Rules can be found in the two [Blocking in Splink](#blocking-in-splink) topic guides.

!!! note "Taking blocking to the extremes"
    If you have a large dataset to deduplicate, let's consider the implications of two cases of taking blocking to the extremes:

    **Not enough blocking** (ensuring all matches are captured)  
    There will be too many record pairs to consider, which will take an extremely long time to run (hours/days) or the process will be so large that it crashes.

    **Too much blocking** (minimising computational resource)  
    There won't be enough records pairs to consider, so the model won't perform well (or will struggle to be trained at all). 

## Blocking in Splink

There are two areas in Splink where blocking is used:

> 

Reviewer: Maybe 'making predictions' should come first here, since it's the more familiar concept (that will be understood by a wider audience).

Might even be worth saying this explicitly in the text - something like: 

There are two areas in Splink where blocking is used:

- The first is to generate pairwise comparisons when finding links (running `predict()`).  This is the sense in which 'blocking' is usually understood in the context of record linkage

- The second is a less familiar application of blocking: using it for the purpose of model training.

each of which is described in their own, dedicated topic guide.

Author: Implemented
